[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the All Thoughts Podcast. I'm [music]
Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Wisenthal.
>> Joe, I have a question.
>> Go on.
>> What is your favorite [music] chain
restaurant? It has to be a sit-down
chain restaurant.
>> A sit-down chain restaurant. That's a
really good question. You know, I
actually really like Chili's. I think
they have their fajitas are absolutely
legit. And I say this as someone who has
eaten quite a lot of Texmex fajitas from
my time in Texas. And so I think I have
credibility. And as a kid, and I haven't
been there in years, but I still think
my memory of the food is really good. I
love Cracker Barrel.
>> Ooh, breakfast at Cracker Barrel is
really, really good. Well, I bring it up
because today we are going to be
answering the question of where all of
these restaurants actually get their
food from.
>> That's a great question. I don't I don't
know anything about I don't know
anything about sitdown chain
restaurants. I mean, I don't know
anything about most chain restaurants,
period, let alone fast food ones. But
the world of sitown ones that are real
restaurants or there's waiters,
waitresses, etc. I don't know anything
about
>> You're not interested in my favorite
restaurants.
>> Oh, [laughter] this is how it works. I
ask you a question and you reciprocate.
I was going to and I was planning to and
then you like turned a 90 degree angle
to talk about how like to talk about we
were going to start answering the
question of where these come from. I was
like, "Oh, okay. I guess we're going on
to some new direction here." We could
just keep talking about favorite
restaurant. Tracy, what is your favorite
restaurant to sit down in?
>> I actually have many. Okay, go.
>> Um, Red Robin.
>> Oh, I love that place. They had a salad
that was basically just a plate of
chicken tenders. It was so good, but
Bill does a salad. Um, Fridays. Used to
love that place. That's so American.
>> I know. And there was one in London and
it was like my anchor to America in the
early 2000s. And Chili's chili with my
boys.
>> You like chili, too? Yeah.
>> Yeah. It's legit. Keep going. We're
going to make up for the fact that I
didn't ask you, but now I'm just keep
going. Let's just
>> Well, one thing one thing I did realize
recently, I've never been to an Olive
Garden. I don't know why that is.
>> I've been a few times. It's not
terrible. I don't think like I've been
I've even been to the one in Time
Square.
>> Yeah. Um,
>> I feel like it's very hard to make carbs
badly, right? It's just pasta and bread.
>> Yeah. Uh, it's good.
>> Okay. All right. I am going to move the
conversation on now.
>> Applebee's a bit of the one in Times
Square there. Solid.
>> I do not like Apple.
>> Why do we have to move the conversation
on? I don't get it. Why can't we just
keep talking about sit down restaurants?
>> All right. Well, we'll get back to them.
We'll get to our recommendations. But on
a serious note, uh, one of the reasons
we are interested in this subject is
because we did a series last year called
beat capitalism where we talked a lot
about agriculture and the chicken
industry specifically and antitrust and
monopolies and things like that. And one
of the things that stood out to me from
that series was a comment from Doha who
is the former assistant attorney general
where she talked about the tyranny of
the middleman in the economy. And I
think this is something that people are,
you know, perhaps just waking up to.
There are all these companies out there
that you have probably never heard of,
but have massively dominant positions in
the economy and charge a lot for their
services. And one of those happens to be
a very large company that provides food
for all these sitdown chain restaurants.
>> You know, I'm going to play devil's
advocate on this episode because, as you
know,
>> because you love chili so much. cuz I
love chilies and I love food production
at massive scale and I love uh all of
this. But it is true that there all
these companies that are really
important that sort of sit between
whether the retailer the customer or
more in the case of food more frequently
the farmer and the end retailer the
farmer and the restaurant that we
literally know nothing about and they're
huge and they're massive and they don't
get any attention. Um and so I am very
interested in this topic.
>> All right. Well, we do have the perfect
guest. It is someone who has been on the
show before. Um I think maybe a year or
two ago now. Yeah. Um wow, time flies.
But we're going to be speaking with
Austin Freric. He is an antitrust and
agricultural expert and also the author
of Baron's Money, Power, and the
Corruption of America's Food Industry.
It's a great book. Even if you're not
interested in agriculture or antitrust
specifically, it says a lot about the US
economy. So, I would highly recommend
it. And Austin actually has just written
a new chapter for his book that is all
about this particular company. And I
guess I should just say what it is. It's
called Cisco.
>> It's not the networking gear company.
>> Not the networking gear company.
Although it does have the most generic
origin story ever. So Cisco stands for
systems and services company.
>> Yum. [laughter] Yum. Delicious.
>> All right, Austin, [clears throat]
welcome back to the show.
>> Thanks for having me on again. And I
just want to say um you guys having me
on last year really changed the course
of my book. So I appreciate that.
>> Oh, thank you. Well, it was genuinely
excellent. I am not just saying that. I
really enjoyed it. Okay. Speaking of
which, how does it work when you decide
to add a new chapter to a book? And why
did you decide to do that?
>> Yeah. So, the funniest thing about this
book was when I would do book talks,
people kept telling me about Barons I
missed.
>> Like I was in Idaho, they're like, "Let
me tell you about a potato baron."
[laughter] When I was in Indiana,
they're
>> like, "We're going to get the name of
the potato baron after the episode." Oh
yeah, I have a whole purgatory folder
that I just put this information into.
>> But Cisco kept coming up and it was the
weirdest um place origin story where so
I talk fast and I know it. So I
purposely been doing book talks in
nursing homes. [snorts]
>> So you have to slow down and practice.
Okay.
>> I I blame it on I listen to podcasts
like 1.5 2.5 and especially Midwestern
older people, you got to take it down.
And what kept happening when I was doing
>> you realize if you're speaking fast
because you're used to it then people
who listen to you on those podcasts are
now listening to you at two and a half
to 3x speed. Anyway,
>> it's bad because my husband listens to
them on 2x too. We talk that way
[laughter]
>> and it's the so um a lot of times when
you do nursing home gigs, they'll invite
you for dinner before and after and it
was um people kept complaining about the
food
>> and I mean anyone that's been to a
hospital or nurs home in America, it's
pretty bad. I mean we're serving our
most farmable people the worst food. Um,
and it kept coming up, but it's Cisco is
one of those things everyone kind of
complains about, but no one knows. And
my mom used to be have a bakery and I
write about that in my coffee chapter.
And um, she had a broad liner and her
broad liner disappeared. They got bought
up by a bigger entity. And so I was just
curious and then
>> that's broadline distribution, right?
>> Yes. Thanks for that's industry term. I
think of them as grocery stores for
restaurants.
>> They were Amazon before Amazon. They
were the everything store.
>> This is really important because when
we're talking about food distribution,
so they're broadlininers. You get
everything there from
you know your huge jar of olives to
cheese or whatever. But then also a
restaurant might also have specialty
distributors too that like just really
focus on one thing, right?
>> If they have the option. Okay.
>> In certain markets, usually most rural
communities there's very few options.
But like for example, New York has one
most competitive broadliner market. So
restaurants here have a lot of different
sourcing options.
>> Yeah. I should just say this is going to
be a very oddloty episode because it
brings together baking, warehouses,
logistics, trucking, antitrust, all that
good stuff. So, I'm very excited. Okay.
Well, on that note, uh how did Cisco get
to be a dominant player in this
particular space?
>> I love this origin story. John Ba, he's
a different type of character compared
to the other Barons in my book. I really
like him. Like, he's like um a model
businessman where he's one of those
people comes out of Waco, Texas. His
brother and dad died young, dropped out
of college, believe Baylor to support
his mom, worked at AM, got transferred
to the AMP in Houston. And he's one of
those people you see in business history
that just saw things before other
people. He saw two important things.
Number one, the rise of frozen food.
We're talking like right after World War
II and how that was going to then also
frozen food mixed with women entering
the workforce
knowing that they want to make quicker
meals. So, we thought, oh, people are
going to eat out more. And thing to keep
in mind here is our norm of eating out
is a very new thing in America. Like
historically, you used to like bring a
dish to something. It was like a church
function. Now we eat out about once a
day.
>> So he saw that thing ahead of people and
he didn't think was moving fast enough.
So he founded a frozen essentially a
frozen berry company. But um going back
to this point you made Joe about all
these different things. That's how the
idea from Cisco came from where it
literally some Irish oil man was opening
a fancy hotel in Houston and he was
working the loading dock that night and
he saw in the day a frozen strawberry.
It's a frozen strawberry. I don't have a
competitive advantage but what I can do
is this food buyer has like 30 different
vendors for all these different things.
What I can do is offer him as much as
possible. So the origin of Cisco was he
brought nine companies together to
create it and he realized someone's
going to fill this at some point. So
even though they only did business in a
few state, he registered in all 50
states. So that's how Cisco was created.
>> I am fascinated by this idea because
it's just one of those things that
hadn't really occurred to me until like
I read your chapter. Just like Yeah.
Like it's really weird how much we eat
out, isn't it? Or it's just really novel
in terms of the prevalence of
restaurants. I mean, I eat out way more
than I did like when I was a kid growing
up.
>> I think about that all the time. We used
to like Bonanza was like a buffet was
like a special occasion once a week and
now I do
>> like a sit down Pizza Hut. That's
another one.
>> Oh, that was such a big deal.
>> Yeah. And now none. Yeah. Now I just You
just do it now.
>> Well, let me pose a question to you.
What do you think? And there's a new
king.
>> The number one sitown chain restaurant
in America is where you order off a
menu.
>> Oh,
>> this is tough. And before I tell you,
it's my favorite chain.
>> Your favorite chain?
Maybe my husband
>> I'm worried that like I'm not going to
know it and then I'm going to be really
embarrassed at how out of touch because
then you're going to say it and it's
going to be really obvious. What is it?
>> Cheesecake Factory.
>> Nope.
>> No. Are we Are we talking about by
dollar volume?
>> Dollar Volume.
>> Okay. Um All right. I
>> Yeah, you're going to have to tell us.
>> I think I'm having stage fright. What's
the answer?
>> Texas Roadhouse.
>> Oh, I love Texas Roadhouse. Oh my god,
they have the best um bread rolls. My
mom brings ziplockc bags and like
>> I should have said that was my favorite.
They had one of those. I' never actually
been to one.
>> When I was living in Abu Dhabi, they had
one and it was absolutely fantastic.
>> You want to understand America? Go to a
Texas road house on a Friday night. I
was in one Debuke, Iowa. I was on book
tour last week and I got a steak,
vegetable, and mashed potatoes, homemade
$14.
>> Unirically, their steaks are really
good. Like they're good. I always have
the fillet.
>> Where do they get their Where do they
get their food? Oh, I mean, who knows
how they I mean, do you think
>> they get it from Cisco and they they
only charge $14 because of the
incredible miracle of capitalism and
scale.
>> Joe, my hot take is two things. They do
scratch cooking. Most chain restaurants
now do frozen food. They actually cut up
broccoli in the back. And number two,
>> volume.
>> Okay. Yeah.
>> Their servers only have three tables and
they move you so quick.
[music]
>> [music]
>> I love that you're doing in-person
research uh on the subject of of chain
restaurants, but you know, you mentioned
that we're not entirely sure uh where
Texas Roadhouse gets its food from. How
does it work um the contracts between a
restaurant and someone like a Cisco?
What do we know about those specific
agreements?
>> So, a few things. One, we can kind of
figure out what change Cisco does based
on its website. So, it has a subdivision
called Sigma.
>> So, if you go to Sigma's website, it
will brag about its corporate clients.
Some of them are Olive Garden, Red
Robins one, you know, different chains
like that.
>> Um, the agreements there's a I mean,
what I do know from these agreements is
what we see with public universities and
even that are not transparent.
>> There's a famous one at the University
of Iowa. Someone wanted to know what's
the contract for food here and it went
up the Supreme Court in Iowa and it was
rejected which is kind of a weird thing
like you think the agricultural state
would have really good sourcing of food.
You would know the contracts. There's
not a lot of disclosure here
>> but they filed to see the actual
contracts
>> to keep it closed.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> So let's say a Red Robin is a or an
Olive Garden is a uh client of Cisco.
Would that be a national contract that
would cover every Red Robin or Olive
Garden or would there be any variation
in red uh in regional distribution or
anything like that? Like
>> I would think so I would contextualize
Cisco as think of it as like FedEx for
food.
>> Okay.
>> A lot of these companies have patent
products and Cisco is just moving their
patent patent and fries. You know what I
mean? Like they all have their kind of
that's what Cisco is there to do is um
outsource that part or handle that. Is
there some giant like Cisco food
production center in like I don't know
the wilderness of Wyoming or something
or are they sort of like scattered
around the United States?
>> Scattered around. I mean this is this is
harder to understand. There was a good
Wall Street Journal article like 20
years ago how a lot of your jalapeno
poppers in a restaurant be all being
made at one factory in Mexico.
>> You know it's cheaper to pay someone
offshore essentially you know stuff it
but then you are sacrificing taste at
some point.
>> But Cisco doesn't own production
facilities. It owned a slaughter house
in Iowa at one point, but then it sold
it off,
>> which I can't quite figure out why they
got into that. My guess is is for most
restaurants, people pick their vendor
based on they call it center of the
plate, the protein.
>> So, they were trying to probably do
quality control.
>> Yeah.
>> Let me start using center of the plate
[laughter] a restaurant to refer to
whichever uh protein I ordered. But this
is so they don't have production. What
basically is, and you already said it's
like FedEx, at its core, it sounds like
it's a logistics company.
>> Yes. Most of their employees are truck
drivers.
>> Huh.
>> Your dad was a truck driver, right? You
talk about this in the book.
>> He is. He works for um a cornstarch
company.
>> So, what did that experience of growing
up with a truck driver uh teach you
about a company like Cisco?
>> So, my dad used to be he first he used
to be in the beer business. So, he's a
beer truck driver and then he worked in
beer sales. So that's actually where a
lot of my um I look at looking at
displays in grocery stores cuz my dad
used to merchandise. So I love good
merchandising. So like my favorite
grocery store is HB in Texas.
>> Love HB.
>> No one merch. No one merchandises like
them.
>> Yeah. This is a fact.
>> And so you look at that and so like my
dad always taught me like he could he
knew the type of demographics of of a
grocery store based on the number one
beer. Like oh this is a blue moon hy or
this is a you know red u red dog hy. Um,
so there's different price points and so
my dad now does um corn products, but
just understanding because there's
independent truck drivers, there's
in-house truck drivers and there's kind
of a hierarchy to these different
worlds,
>> all that kind of stuff. So let's talk
about the competitive landscape because
that's in addition to the fact that you
know you are a big fan of the stakes at
Texas Roadhouse. That's why we're here.
What does the competitive landscape for
sort of this sort of broadline or food
distribution or restaurant really look
like?
>> Um, so that I mean that's that's the big
question antitrust market definition. I
mean that is this is like my little pet
peeve is how you define a markets
everything.
>> So like Cisco tried to buy US foods back
in 2015 and they argue their competition
included Sam's Club. Hm. I think people
like I just remember personally
anecdotally my mom we only went to Sam's
Club when she ran out of cups and needed
to get cups between her next truckload.
Most people would not include Costco and
Sam's Club as a broad lineer.
>> I mean Texas Roadhouse isn't going to
Costco to buy steaks.
>> But in theory a restaurant I mean I I
take your point. It's not really a comp.
But in theory there probably are
restaurants that source from some of
these wholesale.
>> Yeah. I mean, you can tell when you go
into certain local restaurants, you'll
you'll see Costco branded products in
the back. My bigger thing here is right
now a lot of what is a market is defined
by highly paid
>> economist and these things aren't
publicly disclosed usually. I kind of I
keep in mind I come out of the Treasury
tax analysis office. The beauty of that
world is you have Treasury doing tax
revenue estimates, you have CO, CBO, and
you have independent um academic
institutions like UPUPEN doing revenue
estimates. So, you have three different
estimates coming at you for the same
thing. I would love if we did something
like this with market definition because
here's the thing these markets are
pretty stable.
>> Yeah.
>> Having like there should be a government
agency doing market definition reports.
>> So based on how you so the the merger
attempt was blocked it. So based on
however the regulators at the time
defined okay this is the market this is
the circle we're drawing what are we
talking about in terms of market share
and so forth. So keep so at the time too
there's basically three national
broadliners and they were number one
Cisco was trying to buy number two US
foods that was rejected but what's
really interesting here is basically
even though Cisco got stopped two things
number one number two is trying to buy
number three right now um US foods is
trying to buy I have to write it down
performance food
>> um but then Cisco basically is is
engaged in what people call rollups to
my calculations it's bought over 216
companies so even though got it got
stopped once for big merger. It's market
dominance really comes from rolling up,
you know, the a local Miami seafood
place, local produce place in Anaheim,
that kind of stuff. So, I know rollup
strategies started to get more attention
um under the Biden administration, but
historically it does seem like
regulators kind of go after the big M&A
deals and they kind of ignore all the
small ones. Even though once you add up
all the small ones, it can get a company
into a very very dominant position like
with Cisco.
>> I think this is the biggest one of the
biggest loopholes in modern competition
policy in America. I mean, go back to my
coffee bear and JB. Um, their second
move they did was vet clinics because
they, this sounds awful. They realize
people are economically irrational with
their pets when it comes to healthcare.
So, they bought over like 1500 vet
clinics they rolled up. Commissioner
Khan helped put a stop to that. I
generally think with big companies like
this, once you reach a certain size, you
basically don't allow them to acquire
because you just know they're not buying
a a company for pro competitive reasons.
But a lot of this flies under the radar
because the Federal Trade Commission,
you know, it's very understaffed. They
can't keep they they're not tracking a
seafood provider in Miami and who's
buying it. Talk to us more about what
they rolled up or what they've been
trying to rolled up. So, I take it these
aren't other broadliners. Are these
specialty? Are these niche? Are these
regional? Like, what are they what are
the fragmented assets that they're
consolidating under the Cisco umbrella?
>> All the above.
>> Okay. I mean, they generally don't
compete, they buy. So, like in Iowa,
they came to Iowa because they bought a
broadliner, a local broadlininer. That's
essentially what they did for earlier
their history. Now, they tend to buy
more specialty. So, they'll buy like
>> hotel things, you like little soaps.
They'll buy company that does like Asian
food. They'll all these little things
and they're starting to buy foreign like
an Irish broadliner, um a Canadian
broadliner, Costa Rica broadliner. Um
it's just kind of a blob that keeps
growing.
>> Am I a tomato broadliner? I brought Joe
tomatoes.
>> Tracy brought me tomatoes. Yes. Thank
you.
>> Really nice tomatoes.
>> You're a niche. I think you're a
specialty distributor.
>> Yeah. Okay, fair enough. I certainly
don't do it in volume, especially this
year. Um, okay. Well, on that note, in
your chapter, it says that Cisco has
something like 27% market share.
>> It's unclear what the market share is.
So, I originally,
>> this was going to be my question like
when we say that, what do we actually
mean?
>> We don't know. I originally in that
chapter have a quoted as a 50% market
share, but you sometimes you'll see 40,
sometimes you'll see 30. It really comes
back to that market definition. That's
why I want to go back to having some
public entity debate this so it's
transparent. But also partly what
stopped that um purchase of US foods is
when the FTC looked into it, they
started looking at metropolitans and
they realized like in like Las Vegas and
San Diego, it would have like an 80%
market share. So even with food, we tend
to talk national. Food is so local.
>> Food markets particular, we we really
need to drill down regionally.
>> What do they use this power for? setting
aside the fact that they want to make a
lot of money like all companies do like
when I think about the risk of
anti-competitive
abuse or why I wouldn't want one company
to have such a dominant uh you know
share of a given market. I think okay
what is the potential for abuse? So
maybe they say, "No, you're not. You
can't get access to all of this stuff
unless you buy our olives." Maybe could
be one sort of thing. Or they tell a
restaurant, "You can't buy X unless you
buy our soaps." Like what is the fear or
what is the reality of what Cisco
currently does with the amount of power
that they have?
>> Yeah. So two things. Number one, so it's
it's not like you get a big sales book
with the prices of Cisco. Those days are
gone. Most of it's on an app. And this
is a black box. Um, my understanding
from people I've talked to is they
always want to make their margin. So,
they might sell you your center of the
plate, the protein at a loss or cost to
get you in the door, but then they'll
make the margins up by tweaking the
napkin prices.
>> Yeah.
>> Here's the thing. One could argue that's
a in violation of the Robbins and Batman
Act because in theory, you should charge
everyone the same price for X amount of
units, but we don't know because of
>> Oh, so we think it might be personalized
uh pricing, but we're not sure.
>> We're not sure. That is what some people
have accused. The other thing to keep in
mind here and the biggest honestly part
of the reason why I wrote this chapter
is just the quality decline. I feel like
most eating out in America, especially
local places, it's all kind of eh
because companies like Cisco, they don't
want to buy from like a local beef
provider. They want one entity to do a
bunch. And so [snorts] it's just
stifling out that kind of innovation,
the quality. And especially in real
America, Cisco doesn't want to deal with
local things. And so especially in real
I think an undercurrent too of my book I
realized after the fact was the
communities producing our food are
actually being hit hardest by the food
system. We saw in the Kroger and
Albertson merger case failed merger that
they're gouging the most in rural
communities most the broad liner
dominance tends to be highest in rural
communities and rural communities tend
to have the most fast food. So it's kind
of getting the worst of all these
worlds. So like New York has the best
food. Like
it's kind of the more yepy you are in
America probably the better food
selection you have.
>> That that seems fair actually. Um seems
right. And again like that's pretty
ironic given that most of the food is
grown outside of cities obviously. Um
I'm going to ask the question that is
very close to Joe's heart, but with
market dominance tends to come pricing
power. But on the other hand, with
market dominance and scale comes savings
from volume. Do we have any idea of like
the net effect of a Cisco on food prices
in restaurants?
>> We don't I mean kind of what I realized
writing this chapter and just in general
with this book is I just kind of view
everything as Goldilocks and you you
know there is there is beauty to scale
but things have just gotten too far and
things are out of whack. And I think
with price, and I brought this up last
time, and it's the first slide I show
people anytime I talk anymore, is
Americans spend more on average on food
than most Western democracies. And I
think, and it's like cliche to say, I
went to Europe and had cheaper food and
it was better. I think that's how you're
seeing the system play out because you
basically biggets big. You have all
these big boys kind of like going at
each other and it's just [music] kind of
this race to the bottom.
>> [music]
[music]
>> talk to us more about the the food
creator side of the business. If I'm I
don't if I'm growing tomatoes or if I'm
or if me and Tracy are growing tomatoes,
to what degree does Cisco play us off of
each other or squeeze our margins in
order to get within the Cisco
distribution system?
>> I think the best example of that's in
seafood.
>> Okay, the seafood seafood in general
America is just a dumpster fire to be to
be blunt with you. There's a really and
I'm going to make a comparison here.
CNBC came up with a really good story
the other day where Walmart, Amazon are
this big fight right now.
>> Yeah.
>> And Walmart basically
has very low standards for its third
party platform. There's a lot of fraud,
a lot of abuse going on that platform
because it's trying to get market share
from Amazon. I would compare Cisco to
that where they don't here's the thing.
They they don't really care how their
seafood source. I mean, there's been so
many allegations of the calamari coming
from Chinese slave labor. Um fish that's
saying it's Gulf shrimp from the, you
know, from America. It's not just all
these like these constant abuses in this
seafood system, but Cisco not caring
because all it cares about is price.
Think of Cisco like the Walmart food
distribution.
>> That makes sense. So, when you were
reporting out this particular chapter,
did you hear any specific stories from
either restaurant owners or food
producers about dealings with Cisco and
what it's like to actually negotiate
with them?
>> The biggest critique I've heard is just
the lack of selection. Cisco has such a
dominance in a lot of these markets.
Local restaurant owners really don't
have a lot of choices. That's probably
the biggest critique I heard and just my
favorite phrase and it's a subtitle of a
chap of this chapter is uh tonight's
dinner fell off the Cisco truck.
>> We've all had [laughter] those meals.
You know what I mean? You go to a
wedding, you can just tell it's like the
lowest tier of Cisco
>> where it's just so blah and tasteless.
But a lot of restaurants I mean that's
kind of this whole undercurrent of this
book, this chapter is I kind of think of
this as my Frankenstein chapter. what
started off as an aid to local
restaurants to make their life easier is
now undermining them because they're
losing their specialness.
>> Oh yeah. On that note, didn't the
founder at one point try to I I guess he
retired but was still connected to the
company and then he tried to correct
some of what you're describing.
>> Yes. I mean, I can't say this enough. He
is a model businessman. I mean, this
guy, he retired in the late 80s. He
stepped aside, donated the charities,
kept coming into the office each day,
didn't want to sign parking, and he
always trusted his people, especially
the he let basically each warehouse do
its own thing. And I would compare it to
like Whole Foods. Famously, Whole Foods
let the managers do its own thing pre-
Amazon. So if they saw a good thing at
the farmers market, they could bring
that producer in. He retires, a few CEOs
come along. One comes along and the old
man hated consultants. Number one, he's
like, "They don't know my business.
Number two, the poly chair even though
they're not supposed to, they'll share
my secret sauce with my competitors. New
guy comes in, hires consultants, and
what the first thing he says is
centralized procurement,
>> you know, instead of having all these
local different things, get all your
berries from one person. And what John
saw is he saw um changes in the numbers.
So, he wanted to go to the board to talk
about this. CEO time was kept being
like, "No, no, no. This is a
nine-year-old man who built this
company. This is his everything." He
went around and got it to the board.
According to one executive, he wasn't
escorted out the building. This broke
the old man.
>> And did he like literally go into the
building and like find the board and
>> No, he had a uh I could be a certain
staffer get it to all the board members
and he was shown the door.
>> This broke the old man. And you see the
quality decline. you know, centralized
procurement like you in I don't want to
romanticize a jalapeno pepper or like
this kind of stuff, but you are cutting
corners at some point when you're doing
these like not everything can be frozen
and taste just as good as a fresh thing.
Like a good example is actually a tomato
like a good summer tomato. Like there's
no reason in Iowa can't get a good
summer tomato. It's so easy to grow a
tomato there, but they're all the same
blah tomato grown who knows where. And
that's kind of the that kind of story.
And part of it, the argument I'm making
there is part of regulation, guarder
rails, whatever you want to call them,
is almost to prevent companies from
themselves
>> to stop a race to the bottom. It's
interesting this idea that the
restaurants can't distinguish them
themselves to the same degree because of
the sort of decline in quality. And it
strikes me, we did an episode with um
some guys who actually opened up a pizza
restaurant right around the corner from
uh Bloomberg. And in that case, we were
talking about the delivery apps. And the
idea was like, you know, at one point in
theory service, delivery, etc. might
have been a restaurant's calling card,
right? We have really good, we really
know you, etc., and we have
>> we'll get to your house in under 15
minutes or the pizza's free.
>> But then everyone in theory, it's like
this game theory thing where everyone
feels compelled to, okay, we're going to
distribute through the well-known
delivery apps that everyone has heard
about. And that's great. And on some
level it makes markets more efficient
perhaps, although they've gotten so
expensive. I think it's some it for me
it's more efficient often to just go
pick it up. But that's besides the
point. But the long-term effect is
essentially this sort of elimination of
the specialness of the place. And so
maybe there is more efficient, maybe the
food is cheaper, maybe it doesn't get
too faster, maybe even gets too faster
and hotter, etc. But this idea that we
have this sort of textured economy with
this sort of flora and fauna of
businesses that are distinct that have
texture sort of disappears once they
plug into these giant platforms.
>> You just made a great neobrandise
argument.
>> Oh great. I mean this might not shock
anyone. I'm a neobrandise person but
yeah that is
>> my critique of the current antitrust
framework is not everything can be put
into Excel. How many hogs one person
shown? It's a question society is has to
wrestle with and I make that kind of
point in this chapter was um at my
wedding um I'm part Czech and we serve
colatches which colatches in Iowa are
very different than the ones in Houston.
Houston they put meat in them
>> but like you can't buy coalaches from
Cisco.
>> It's like
>> these local little things make a place a
place and you're losing this the
homogenization of American food system.
Like everything's kind of the same. It's
kind of blah
>> and that's what's it's hard to you can't
that that's what's the thing that's
missing. That's why
>> it is a little it does seem frankly a
little hard to quantify this effect that
everybody feels.
>> I I think of two little examples is my
mom had her own coffee store and then
she went worked at Starbucks and what
drove her the nuts the most were
something called planagrams. She was
told where to put every single thing on
the shelf and my mom worked next to a
General Mills plant. She knew that
audience and she knew how to merchandise
but they didn't trust her. It's like the
lack of trust in employee.
>> We learned about Plentagrams.
>> Oh yeah, that's right.
>> I think he was with the Celsius CEO and
he was talking a good episode.
>> Yeah. I have since walked into uh CVS's
uh looking at the shelf space very very
differently than I used to.
>> Oh, I'll just add on the thing to keep
in mind is no one gets no one opens a
restaurant to get rich. Everyone it's a
really really hard industry. you're
willing to sacrifice incomes because you
do it because what you love and you just
you feel that pride in local places and
they're just running they're running
uphill more and more based on because of
these structures.
>> You know, you mentioned frozen berries
earlier and I know uh berry baronss are
in your book. Do the dominant companies
like a Cisco or a berry baron. Do they
kind of like feed on each other you
think? Like does Cisco naturally lean
towards producers who are making stuff
in huge volumes? I mean, I think it goes
back to Walmart. I mean, part of it was
people in negotiating power when they
negotiate deals with these companies.
So, you got to get big so you have some
volume so you can negotiate. Like, I
think of I go back to Walmart just
because I think of Walmart as the
closest thing America's ever had to a
Soviet Union South Palro. That's the
weirdest chapter people have reached out
to me about is all these suppliers.
Like, you don't negotiate with Walmart.
Walmart dictates to you. I think with
Cisco is they're just so big.
>> These are centrally planned internal
economies. Absolutely. And it's I think
the best example of the bad quality is
actually the produce system in America.
Partly is because of the farm bill. We
subsidize corn. We don't subsidize
carrots. So our produce system went
offshore, you know, because you can
exploit labor and exploit environmental
stuff. So that green peppers coming from
who knows where traveling long things.
And so and it's also designed for
durability, not for taste. And you're
seeing this play out in your local
restaurants where just the food's kind
of
>> It's interesting you used the phrase
earlier saving companies from
themselves. I think even the companies
seem to be aware of this and and you
mentioned Starbucks is a great example.
I forget what's the name of the
Starbucks founder. He everyone
>> it's not Howard Schultz. That's who we
think it is. Oh well, Howard Schultz
every every few years his name is back
in the headlines and he himself seems to
rue the fact that this company which
early on sort of had a local coffee shop
vibe which I think he really liked has
not been able to sustain that in part
because of yeah the required playgrounds
and stuff and he complains about that
every once in a while like we got to get
back to feeling like a real Italian
coffee shop. It never seems to happen.
Well, one of the Ben & Jerry's founders
just quit as well because Ben and
Jerry's was bought by Unilever.
>> So, the funding each chapter I realized
there's they all had these like niche
every commodity is different in America
and they all like dairy is actually to
me the most complex commodity. Um the
whole dairy regulation in America is
written in the 19 before we had
refrigeration. So, it makes no sense.
The joke in dairy is only five people
understand the dairy program and four
are dead. And I was uh kibbitzing with
this dairy guy in Wisconsin last week
and there's a glut right now in the
butter fat market. We engineered
soybeans to increase the butter fat. And
the rumor right now on the street too is
we're feeding palm oil to to cows.
>> Oh wow.
>> Speaking of dairy, you know, when we we
did that episode with Mike Froman
recently and you mentioned that you
asked him what was the biggest surprise
he learned as US trade rep. He's like,
"Oh, there's 500 different things you
could do with a dairy molecule and
because of trade rules." Anyway, by the
way, just just following up, I am
currently in uh touch with someone from
the big New Zealand dairy cooperative
Fonta. So, I'm working on finding from
Big Dairy. I am working on finding the
dairy molecule specialist for that
episode.
>> Oh, well that's very exciting. Maybe
we'll end up doing a three-part milk
series. Who knows? We better hurry it up
since it's almost October. Um, okay.
>> Is there anything that can be done about
this? Like now that a Cisco has rolled
up all these different companies and it
has substantial market share, although
as we were discussing, we can debate
what that actually means.
Is there like what swings that dominance
the other way?
Yeah, I mean
to Joe's just I just want to add on to
Joe's point earlier about the companies
um not wanting to have to do this but if
they don't engage this be like the
system designed right now is they have
to do this behavior and I actually think
about that with farmers now in America
[clears throat] the farm bill right now
is designed to maximize corn so you have
to overplant corn even though it's bad
for the environment or else you go broke
so everyone's behaving this way because
we're we're in a lazair era um what to
do about it and that's kind of why I
profiled this woman named Ellen in that
chapter She I think people crave heroes
right now. They no one's really
articulating hope on whatever your
political party is. What is what is a
positive food system? And Ellen Ellen's
fascinating where she's a farmer. She
has two kids. Um she opened her own
restaurant and then she opened her own
like Cisco because the problem she has
with Cisco didn't want to take her
product and sell to restaurants in Omaha
De Moine. So she created a nonprofit got
it up. They would basically pull
different farmers in western Iowa to
sell into these. It was using and they
were also doing schools. That was a big
one. But then they got really hard hit
by the doge cuts. That to me is like
maybe one possible thing is maybe
extension. You have extension all across
rural America. Maybe they can kind of
get into that help this kind of
procurement.
>> Yeah. Maybe you don't try to compete
against Cisco on volume but you go like
hyper localized.
>> Hyper local but also something we got to
reign in Cisco. I mean looking at the
the black box of the pricing strategy
would be huge but also I think we should
put merger acquisition freezes on these
large entities at some point. It's like
you can't buy anymore. Like you've hit
your cap.
>> It's interesting Tracy like um the other
great homogenizing effect of course on
society is big digital platforms right
Instagram etc. and everyone feels that
they have to constrain whatever they do
whether it's a restaurant or a media
company etc in order to uh serve the
Elgo god that is sort of capriccious and
unpredictable in some way. And it feels
like the story whether we're talking
about the physical world or the digital
world is that scale has this
homogenizing effect which nobody really
likes these conditions.
>> Yeah, I think that's right. But also
there are these like hidden tiers of
scale viz these middlemen companies. All
right. Well, Austin, thank you so much
for coming back on OddLots. Congrats on
the new chapter and uh I'm sure a lot of
[music] people will be looking forward
to picking up the revised book.
>> Yeah, thank you so much for having me on
again.
[music]
>> Joe, that was really enjoyable.
>> Yeah,
>> I always love talking about food.
Although I haven't had lunch today, so
um me I'm a little bit hung. Can we go
to Olive Garden in Time Square? Let's do
it. Right.
>> Let's go soon. I'll go. I'm happy to go
there soon.
>> Okay. Um I I actually would like to go
to garden.
>> It's got great views. It's actually
really fun and it's got great views.
>> Oh, you've been to that specific one?
>> Oh, I didn't realize. Yeah.
>> Um Okay.
>> So, there was a lot to pick out from
that. Um I know you're on the side of
cheap and plentiful food, but perhaps
>> perhaps I guess the homogeneity of the
offering, maybe that concerns you.
>> It definitely concerns me. And this idea
that no and this idea that restaurants
if they you know so much of the
preparation is done offsite etc for
various things that you eat and so what
is the restaurant anymore and so this is
a thing where scale is great and
cheapness is great and I'm all for this
and I think food should be a lot cheaper
than it is because we've had a lot of
food inflation in this country and I
think it's very worrisome and so food
should be a lot cheaper and more
efficient etc. than it is. But when we
think about the things that sort of make
a society nice, if if a restaurant is
really just a sort of Cisco
manufacturing Yeah. or a Cisco manu,
right, a giant microwave that can
connects a Cisco manu distribution
system to a GrubHub delivery system.
What world are we living in?
>> Yeah. And I think it gets back to the
flora and fauna point that you were
making. So maybe you could have, you
know, uh, food that's cheap and maybe
not of the highest quality, but it is
plentiful um, and inexpensive, but then
you should have, you know, more local
options.
>> Well, you brought me those really nice
tomatoes, so thank you for those.
>> You're welcome. And so there are
tomatoes, but I do not think that is a
scalable solution for most people. No.
>> And I grew up hating tomatoes because I
thought that they were all really bland
because I only got them in the
>> grocery markets. Yeah, it it is
phenomenal how different a supermarket
tomato tastes from a homegrown one.
Anyway, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Alaway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Austin Far. He's at Austin Ferk. And
check out the new edition of his book
Barren, which has the whole chapter
about Cisco. Follow our producers Carmen
Rodriguez at Kerman Arman Dashel Bennett
at D-Bot and Kaleb Brooks at Kalebrooks.
For more OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlotss.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes [music] and you can chat
about all of these topics 247 in our
Discord discord.gg/odlots.
[music]
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you want us
to dig into dairy, then please leave us
a [music] positive review on your
favorite podcast platform. And remember,
if you are a Bloomberg [music]
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[music]
Heat. Heat.